# Over the Top

[Over the Top swing error][images/over-the-top.png]

An over the top swing is one that features a downswing in which the clubhead is located outside of the target line as it makes its descent towards the ball.

## Problem(s)

### Cannot produce straight shots at target

[Over the top leads to an outside-in club path][images/over-the-top-problem-outside-in.png]

The over the top swing produces a club path that sees the clubhead travel outside of the target line, only to cross it at impact and to continue to the inside of the target line after impact has occurred.

This outside-in club path is in stark contrast to the ideal inside-square-inside club path and it simply cannot produce straight shots towards the target if the clubface is remotely square to the target at impact. Indeed, for those suffering from an over the top swing the only way to produce straight shots is to do so by having a closed clubface at impact relative to the club path. But doing so will demand precise clubface adjustments and is not a viable long-term strategy.

Rather, golfers will be better suited to correcting the over the top swing error entirely and to promote shots that do fly straight.

### Can't generate much energy & power

Another issue with an over the top swing is that it fails to generate much energy and as a result can't transfer much power onto the ball.

This lack of power is due to the outside-in club path that sees the clubhead essentially swinging across the ball instead of driving through the ball. Indeed, a swing that is coming from the inside is better suited at transferring power onto the ball, benefiting from the power that is generated by the release of the energy stored through the coiling of the torso.

## Fixes

### Adopt a square takeaway instead of one outside of the target line

[Adopt a square takeaway to help fix an over the top swing][images/over-the-top-fix-square-takeaway.png]

An over the top swing finds one of its origins in a takeaway that sees the club brought back outside of the target line. Indeed, a club that is positioned outside of the target line early on in the backswing will see its shaft crossing the target line eventually.

And a club that crosses the target line on the backswing will have a harder time not doing so on the downswing as well.

So instead of allowing the club to wander to the outside of the target line early on, you should focus on keeping the club square or even slightly inside early on in the takeaway. Doing so will prevent the club from crossing the target line and should see the club travel on a path more friendly to an inside-out club path.

More on the: Takeaway

### Focus on your right elbow and initiate the downswing with your elbow dropping down rather than moving forward and out

[Initiate your downswing by letting your right elbow drop instead of moving it forward][images/over-the-top-elbow-down.png]

An over the top swing is characterized by a downswing that has the club moving out instead of down. And while moving out is the result of different things, you can help correcting that swing error by focusing on your right elbow.

Indeed, instead of letting your right elbow move forward and out you should initiate your downswing with your right elbow dropping down while staying relatively close to your body. Doing so will help you move the club in the right direction rather than letting it wander outside.

More on the: Downswing

## Swing Thought(s)

### Swing like you're holding a garden hose

Imagine you're holding a garden hose in your hands instead of a golf club. As you make your swing focus on spraying the grass in front of you rather than spraying it to the right and across. This swing key should help you in bringing the club from the inside rather than from the outside.

### Bring the club back inside

As you reach the top of your swing and initiate your downswing focus on bringing the club from the inside rather than allowing it to come down from outside the target line. You may want to exaggerate the move early on but after some practice it should come more naturally to you.
